
<chapter id="credits">

<!-- Include credits for the programmers, documentation writers, and
contributors here. The license for your software should then be
included below the credits with a reference to the appropriate license
file included in the KDE distribution. -->

<title>Credits and License</title>

<para>&appname;</para>

<para>Program copyright 2001-2005 &ion; <email>&email-ion;</email></para>

<para>Documentation copyright:</para>
<para>2001-2005 &ion; &email-ion;</para>
<para>2006 &roger; &email-roger;</para>


</chapter>

<appendix id="installation">
<title>Installation</title>

<sect1 id="getting-qtiplot">
<title>How to obtain &appname;</title>

<para>
The &appname; home page can be found at <ulink url="&homepage;">&homepage;</ulink>.
Updates and news can be found there.
</para>

<para>
&appname; is distributed as a package with sources which have to be compiled. 
Compiled packages for most Linux distributions and for Windows can also be obtained. 
If you want to build QtiPlot from sources, don't forget first to download and install the 
<ulink url="http://www.trolltech.com/products/qt/index.html">Qt</ulink>,
<ulink url="http://qwtplot3d.sourceforge.net/">QwtPlot3D</ulink>,
<ulink url="http://sourceforge.net/projects/liborigin/">liborigin</ulink>,  
<ulink url="http://www.zlib.net/">zlib</ulink> and  
<ulink url="http://sources.redhat.com/gsl/">GSL</ulink> libraries. 

</para>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="requirements">
<title>Requirements</title>

<para>In order to successfully use &appname;, you need the following libraries:</para>

<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
  <term>Qwt</term>
  <listitem>
    <para>You must use the CVS version of the Qwt 5 library which comes with the QtiPlot archive ("3rdparty" folder). This should be statically linked to QtiPlot in order to avoid conflicts on your operating system.</para>
  </listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
  <term>muParser</term>
  <listitem>
    <para>The last version of the <ulink url="http://muparser.sourceforge.net/">muParser (1.26)</ulink>
	 library is included in &appname; ("3rdparty/muParser" folder), so you don't need to download and install it.</para>
  </listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
  <term>qmake</term>
  <listitem>
    <para>In order to build QtiPlot you also need <emphasis>qmake</emphasis>, that is official part of Qt 3.x.</para>
  </listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="installation-from-binary">
<title>Installation from binary packages</title>

<para>&appname; distributes a binary <ulink url="http://www.debian.org/">Debian</ulink> package and a <ulink url="http://www.rpm.org/">RPM</ulink> package for RedHat, Mandrake and SuSE distributions. The RPM package was created on an <ulink url="http://www.ubuntulinux.org/">Ubuntu</ulink> distribution.</para>

<para>To install on Linux Debian: download the package file <ulink  url="&kappdownload;">qtiplot_&kappversion;_i386.deb</ulink>,
then login as "root" and type:</para>
<screen>
dpkg -i qtiplot_0.x.x_i386.deb
</screen>

<para>To install the RPM package: download the file <ulink url="&kappdownload;">qtiplot-&kappversion;-1.i386.rpm</ulink>,
then login as "root" and type:</para>
<screen>
rpm -i qtiplot-0.x.x-1.i386.rpm
</screen>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="compilation">
<title>Compilation and Installation from sources</title>

<sect2 id="compilation-linux">
<title>Linux and Mac OS X</title>

<para>Download the <ulink url="&kappdownload;">qtiplot archive</ulink> (.tar.bz2 or .zip file) and decompress it. Then open a  terminal (console) window and go to the main folder of the decompressed archive (which should be named &kappdirectory;-&version;). You must be sure that &appname; is able to find the <ulink url="http://qwtplot3d.sourceforge.net/">QwtPlot3D</ulink> library. You have to go to the &kappdirectory; directory and open the file &kappdirectory;.pro. The folowing line add a new path to the library files  which should be available for the compiling:</para>
<screen>
unix:INCLUDEPATH  += -I /usr/lib/qt3/include/qwtplot3d
</screen>
<para>it should point to the correct directory. Once this is done, go back to the main directory &kappdirectory;-&version; and type:</para>
<screen>
qmake qtiplot.pro
make
strip qtiplot
</screen>

<para>to install &appname;, you must login as root and type:</para>
<screen>
make install
</screen>
<para>You can then logout from root and launch the application:</para>
<screen>
qtiplot
</screen>

<para>If you want Python scripting support, you will also need to download and install: <ulink url="http://muparser.sourceforge.net/">Python</ulink> 2.4, <ulink url="http://www.riverbankcomputing.co.uk/sip">SIP</ulink> 4.4.5,
and <ulink url="http://www.riverbankcomputing.co.uk/pyqt">PyQt</ulink> 3.16. All three of them are included in many Linux distributions.
Other versions as those indicated above may or may not work.
Specifically, there are known issues with a number of SIP versions and a given version of PyQt will only work with a limited range of SIP
versions. Warning: You might need to edit  the "qtiplot-x.x.x/qtiplot/qtiplot.pro" file in the archive and set the path to the SIP executable to point to the correct location of SIP 4.4.5 on your computer, by changing the following line:
"unix:system(sip -I /usr/share/sip -t Qt_3_3_0 -t WS_X11 -c $${MOC_DIR} src/qti.sip)"
</para>


</sect2>
<sect2 id="compilation-windows">
<title>Windows</title>

<para>QtiPlot distributes a binary Windows package. You can download the <ulink url="&kappdownload;">qtiplot-&kappversion;.exe</ulink> file. To install, open a Windows Explorer, double click on 'qtiplot-&kappversion;.exe' icon and follow the installation instructions.</para>

<para>If you want to compile the application from sources you need to purchase the <ulink url="http://www.informit.com/title/0131240722" >Qt3 official book</ulink>, that comes with a CD containing a non commercial version of Qt 3.2.1. Then, to install:</para>

<orderedlist>
  <listitem>
    <para>Download the <ulink url="&kappdownload;">qtiplot</ulink> archive and unzip it.</para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>Modify the 'qtiplot.pro' file in order to set the INCLUDEPATH variable to the 'include' directory of your local build of the <ulink url="http://www6.in.tum.de/~kiss/WinGsl.htm">WinGSL</ulink> folder.</para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>Modify the 'qtiplot.pro' file in order to set the LIBS variable, in the win32 section,  to the actual directories of your local build of the <ulink url="http://www6.in.tum.de/~kiss/WinGsl.htm">WinGSL</ulink> library.</para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>Open a MS-DOS command terminal, go to the 'qtiplot' folder and type:</para>
    <orderedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>For MSVC users with <emphasis>nmake</emphasis>:</para>
        <screen>
          qmake qtiplot.pro
          nmake
        </screen>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>For Visual Studio users, <emphasis>qmake</emphasis> can also generate '.dsp' files. All you need to do is type:</para>
        <screen>
          qmake -tp vc qtiplot.pro
        </screen>
        <para>then open the 'qtiplot.dsp' file, go to the 'Build' menu and chose 'Set active configuration...'. Choose the "qtiplot-Win32 Release' project configuration and press OK. Press the 'F7' key to build the application.</para>
      </listitem>
    </orderedlist>
  </listitem>
</orderedlist>

</sect2>

</sect1>

</appendix>
